---
title: Superuser Me
date: 2025-03-07
categories: [Blog]
tags: [Blog, Homelab, Debian]
---

Just a quick post on the `sudo` command as it pertains to vanilla Debian. Its one of those things I take for granted on the derivatives and forget I need to install on a fresh VM or Debian machine. I won't go into too much detail here as to the importance not executing commands as root etc. This is more for my personal reference. Yes, I know tons of guides are already out there about this and its only like six steps... but this blog is kinda about self hosting and publicizing my documentation.

Lets assume we've got Debian installed and are logged into the CLI as our user. We'll call him `medic`.

>If were already logged in as the root user, maybe a new CT, skip to [this section](/posts/sudo/#already-root)
{: .prompt-info}

Switch to the root user by typing `su -` in the command line followed by the **root** password.

>Don't miss the `-` in the above command as it initializes the root path and allows us to add a user later.
{: .prompt-tip}

Then install sudo with the standard apt command:

```bash
apt install sudo
```

Next, add any user that needs sudo access to the *sudo* group. In this example our user is `medic`

```bash
adduser medic sudo
```

We should see an output similar to below:

```bash
Adding user `medic' to group `sudo'
```

Once this is complete, exit the root shell and completely log out.

Log back in as our newly added `sudo` user and try to run a command with sudo.

If it all went well, the command should run without issues and we are now able to elevate this user to sudo.

## Already Root?

If were already in the system as root the steps are a bit different, especially if we don't already have a user initialized.

As the root user, first thing is to create our new user. In this example I'll use `appuser`.

```bash
adduser appuser
```

The system will create `appuser` then prompt for a user password and demographics. Enter them as they apply.

> To remove this user simply run the `deluser` command. Example: `deluser appuser`

Since this post is about `sudo` we need to make sure we've installed that too.

```bash
apt install sudo
```

Then add our new user to the `sudo` group.

```bash
usermod -aG sudo appuser
```

Log out of `root` and log back in as this new `appuser`. Try and run a sudo command and everything should work.



Pretty simple and Linux 101 stuff but for some reason, I always need to review it when rebuilding my systems.

Happy sudoing!